


Common Test for Uncommon Tests
------------------------------

A few chapters ago, we've seen how to use EUnit to do unit and module
testing, and even some concurrent testing. At that point, EUnit
started to show its limits. Complex setups and longer tests that
needed to interact between each other became problematic. Plus, there
was nothing in there to handle our new knowledge of distributed Erlang
and all of its power. Fortunately, there's another test framework that
exists, this one more appropriate to the heavy lifting we now want to
do.



What is Common Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As programmers, we enjoy treating our programs as black boxes. Many of
us would define the core principle behind a good abstraction as being
able to replace whatever it is we've written by an anonymous black
box. You put something in the box, you get something out of it. You
don't care how it works on the inside, as long as you get what you
want.

In the testing world, this has an important connection to how we like
to test systems. When we were working with EUnit, we've seen how to
treat a module as a *black box*: you only test the exported functions
and none of the ones inside, which are not exported. I've also given
examples on testing items as a *white box*, like in the case of the
process quest player module's tests, where we looked at the innards of
the module to make its testing simpler. This was necessary because the
interaction of all the moving parts inside the box made testing it
from the outside very complex.

That was for modules and functions. What if we zoom out a bit? Let's
fiddle with our scope in order to see the broader picture. What if
what we want to test is a library? What if it's an application? Even
broader, what if it's a complete system? Then what we need is a tool
that's more adept at doing something called *system testing*.

EUnit is a pretty good tool for white box testing at a module level.
It's a decent tool to test libraries and OTP applications. It's
possible to do system testing and black box testing, but it's not
optimal.

Common Test, however, is pretty damn good at system testing. It's
decent for testing libraries and OTP applications, and it's possible,
but not optimal, to use it to test individual modules. So the smaller
what you test is, the more appropriate (and flexible, and fun) EUnit
will be. The larger your test is, the more appropriate (and flexible,
and, uh, somewhat fun) Common Test will be.

You might have heard of Common Test before and tried to understand it
from the documentation given with Erlang/OTP. Then you likely gave up
real quick. Don't worry. The problem is that Common Test is very
powerful and has an accordingly long user guide, and that at the time
of this writing, most of its documentation appears to be coming from
internal documentation from the days when it was used only within the
walls of Ericsson. In fact, its documentation is more of a reference
manual for people who already understand it than a tutorial.

In order to properly learn Common Test, we'll have to start from the
simplest parts of it and slowly grow our way to system tests.



Common Test Cases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before even getting started, I have to give you a little overview of
how Common Test organises its things. First of all, because Common
Test is appropriate for system testing, it will assume two things:


#. We will need data to instantiate our stuff
#. We will need a place to store all that side-effecty stuff we do,
   because we're messy people.


Because of this, Common Test will regularly be organized as follows:

The test case is the simplest one. It's a bit of code that either
fails or succeeds. If the case crashes, the test is unsuccessful (how
surprising). Otherwise, the test case is thought to be successful. In
Common Test, test cases are single functions. All these functions live
in a test suite (3), a module that takes care of regrouping related
test cases together. Each test suite will then live in a directory,
the Test Object Directory (2). The test root (1) is a directory that
contains many test object directories, but due to the nature of OTP
applications often being developed individually, many Erlang
programmers tend to omit that layer.

In any case, now that we understand that organisation, we can go back
to our two assumptions (we need to instantiate stuff, and then mess
stuff up). Each test suite is a module that ends with `_SUITE`. If I
were to test the magic 8-ball application from last chapter, I might
thus call my suite `m8ball_SUITE`. Related to that one is a directory
called the *data directory*. Each suite is allowed to have one such
directory, usually named `Module_SUITE_data/`. In the case of the
magic 8-ball app, it would have been `m8ball_SUITE_data/`. That
directory contains anything you want.

What about the side-effects? Well because we might run tests many
times, Common Test develops its structure a bit more:

Whenever you run the tests, Common Test will find some place to log
stuff (usually the current directory, but we'll see how to configure
it later). When doing so, it will create a unique directory where you
can store your data. That directory ( *Priv Dir* above), along with
the data directory, will be passed as part of some initial state to
each of your tests. You're then free to write whatever you want in
that private directory, and then inspect it later, without running the
risk of overwriting something important or the results of former test
runs.

Enough with this architectural material; we're ready to write our
first simple test suite. Create a directory named `ct/` (or whatever
you'd like, this is hopefully a free country, after all). That
directory will be our test root. Inside of it, we can then make a
directory named `demo/` for the simpler tests we'll use as examples.
This will be our test object directory.

Inside the test object directory, we'll begin with a module named
basic_SUITE.erl, to see the most basic stuff possible. You can omit
creating the `basic_SUITE_data/` directory â€” we won't need it for this
run. Common Test won't complain.

Here's what the module looks like:


::

    
    -module(basic_SUITE).
    -include_lib("common_test/include/ct.hrl").
    -export([all/0]).
    -export([test1/1, test2/1]).
    
    all() -> [test1,test2].
    
    test1(_Config) ->
        1 = 1.
    
    test2(_Config) ->
        A = 0,
        1/A.


Let's study it step by step. First of all, we've got to include the
file `"common_test/include/ct.hrl"`. That file gives a few useful
macros, and even though `basic_SUITE` doesn't use them, it's usually a
good habit of including that file.

Then we have the function `all/0`. That function returns a list of
test cases. It's basically what tells Common Test "hey, I want to run
these test cases!". EUnit would do it based on the name ( `*_test()`
or `*_test_()`); Common Test does it with an explicit function call.

What about these _Config variables? They're unused for now, but for
your own personal knowledge, they contain the initial state your test
cases will require. That state is literally a proplist, and it
initially contains two values, `data_dir` and `priv_dir`, the two
directories we have for our static data and the one where we can mess
around.

We can run the tests either from the command line or from an Erlang
shell. If you use the command line, you can call `$ ct_run -suite
Name_SUITE`. In Erlang/OTP versions before R15 (released around
December 2011), the default command was `run_test` instead of `ct_run`
(although some systems had both already). The name was changed with
the objective of minimizing the risk of name clashes with other
applications by moving to a slightly less generic name. Running it, we
find:


::

    
    ct_run -suite basic_SUITE
    ...
    Common Test: Running make in test directories...
    Recompile: basic_SUITE
    ...
    Testing ct.demo.basic_SUITE: Starting test, 2 test cases
    
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    basic_SUITE:test2 failed on line 13
    Reason: badarith
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    
    Testing ct.demo.basic_SUITE: *** FAILED *** test case 2 of 2
    Testing ct.demo.basic_SUITE: TEST COMPLETE, 1 ok, 1 failed of 2 test cases
    
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/demo/index.html... done
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/demo/all_runs.html... done


And we find that one of our two test cases fails. We also see that we
apparently inherited a bunch of HTML files. Before looking to know
what this is about, let's see how to run the tests from the Erlang
shell:


::

    
    $ erl
    ...
    1> ct:run_test([{suite, basic_SUITE}]).
    ...
    Testing ct.demo.basic_SUITE: Starting test, 2 test cases
    
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    basic_SUITE:test2 failed on line 13
    Reason: badarith
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    ...
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/demo/index.html... done
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/demo/all_runs.html... done
    ok


I've removed a bit of the output above, but it gives exactly the same
result as the command line version. Let's see what's going on with
these HTML files:


::

    
    $ ls
    all_runs.html
    basic_SUITE.beam
    basic_SUITE.erl
    ct_default.css
    ct_run.NodeName.YYYY-MM-DD_20.01.25/
    ct_run.NodeName.YYYY-MM-DD_20.05.17/
    index.html
    variables-NodeName


Oh what the hell did Common Test do to my beautiful directory? It is a
shameful thing to look at. We've got two directories there. Feel free
to explore them if you feel adventurous, but all the cowards like me
will prefer to instead look at either the `all_runs.html` or the
`index.html` files. The former will link to indexes of all iterations
of the tests you ran while the latter will link to the newest runs
only. Pick one, and then click around in a browser (or press around if
you don't believe in mice as an input device) until you find the test
suite with its two tests:

You see that `test2` failed. if you click on the underlined line
number, you'll see a raw copy of the module. If you instead click on
the `test2` link, you'll see a detailed log of what happened:


::

    
    === source code for basic_SUITE:test2/1 
    === Test case started with:
    basic_SUITE:test2(ConfigOpts)
    === Current directory is "Somewhere on my computer"
    === Started at 2012-01-20 20:05:17
    [Test Related Output]
    === Ended at 2012-01-20 20:05:17
    === location [{basic_SUITE,test2,13},
                  {test_server,ts_tc,1635},
                  {test_server,run_test_case_eval1,1182},
                  {test_server,run_test_case_eval,1123}]
    === reason = bad argument in an arithmetic expression
      in function  basic_SUITE:test2/1 (basic_SUITE.erl, line 13)
      in call from test_server:ts_tc/3 (test_server.erl, line 1635)
      in call from test_server:run_test_case_eval1/6 (test_server.erl, line 1182)
      in call from test_server:run_test_case_eval/9 (test_server.erl, line 1123)


The log lets you know precisely what failed, and it is much more
detailed than whatever we had in the Erlang shell. This is important
to remember because if you're a shell user, you'll find Common Test
extremely painful to use. If you're a person more prone to use GUIs
anyway, then it'll be pretty fun for you.

But enough wandering around pretty HTML files, let's see how to test
with some more state.

Note: if you ever feel like traveling back in time without the help of
a time machine, download a version of Erlang prior to R15B and use
Common Test with it. You'll be astonished to see that your browser and
the logs' style brought you back into the late 1990s.



Testing With State
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you have read the EUnit chapter (and haven't skipped around),
you'll remember that EUnit had these things called *fixtures*, where
we'd give a test case some special instantiation (setup) and teardown
code to be called before and after the case, respectively.

Common Test follows that concept. Instead of having EUnit-style
fixtures, it instead relies on two functions. The first is the setup
function, called `init_per_testcase/2` and the second one is the
teardown function, called `end_per_testcase/2`. To see how they're
used, create a new test suite called state_SUITE (still under the
`demo/` directory), add the following code:


::

    
    -module(state_SUITE).
    -include_lib("common_test/include/ct.hrl").
    
    -export([all/0, init_per_testcase/2, end_per_testcase/2]).
    -export([ets_tests/1]).
    
    all() -> [ets_tests].
    
    init_per_testcase(ets_tests, Config) ->
        TabId = ets:new(account, [ordered_set, public]),
        ets:insert(TabId, {andy, 2131}),
        ets:insert(TabId, {david, 12}),
        ets:insert(TabId, {steve, 12943752}),
        [{table,TabId} | Config].
    
    end_per_testcase(ets_tests, Config) ->
        ets:delete(?config(table, Config)).
    
    ets_tests(Config) ->
        TabId = ?config(table, Config),
        [{david, 12}] = ets:lookup(TabId, david),
        steve = ets:last(TabId),
        true = ets:insert(TabId, {zachary, 99}),
        zachary = ets:last(TabId).


This is a little normal ETS test checking a few `ordered_set`
concepts. What's interesting about it is the two new functions,
`init_per_testcase/2` and `end_per_testcase/2`. Both functions need to
be exported in order to be called. If they're exported, the functions
are going to be called for *all* test cases in a module. You can
separate them based on the arguments. The first one is the name of the
test case (as an atom), and the second one is the Config proplist that
you can modify.

Note: to read from Config , rather than using `proplists:get_value/2`,
the Common test include file has a `?config(Key, List)` macro that
returns the value matching the given key. The macro is in fact a
wrapper around `proplists:get_value/2` and is documented as such, so
you know you can deal with Config as a proplist without worrying about
it ever breaking.

As an example, if I had tests `a`, `b`, and `c` and only wanted a
setup and teardown function for the first two tests, my init function
might look like this:


::

    
    init_per_testcase(a, Config) ->
        [{some_key, 124} | Config];
    init_per_testcase(b, Config) ->
        [{other_key, duck} | Config];
    init_per_testcase(_, Config) ->
        %% ignore for all other cases
        Config.


And similarly for the `end_per_testcase/2` function.

Looking back at `state_SUITE`, you can see the test case, but what's
interesting to note is how I instantiate the ETS table. I specify no
heir, and yet, the tests run without a problem after the init function
is done.

You'll remember that we've seen, in the `ETS chapter`_, that ETS
tables are usually owned by the process that started them. In this
case, we leave the table as it is. If you run the tests, you'll see
the suite succeeds.

What we can infer from this is that the `init_per_testcase` and
`end_per_testcase` functions run in the same process as the test case
itself. You can thus safely do things like set links, start tables and
whatnot without worrying about different processes breaking your
things. What about errors in the test case? Fortunately, crashing in
your test case won't stop Common Test from cleaning up and calling the
`end_per_testcase` function, with the exception of `kill` exit
signals.

We're now pretty much equal to EUnit with Common Test, at least in
terms of flexibility, if not more. Although we haven't got all the
nice assertion macros, we have fancier reports, similar fixtures, and
that private directory where we can write stuff from scratch. What
more do we want?

Note: if you end up feeling like outputting stuff to help you debug
things or just show progress in your tests, you'll quickly find out
that `io:format/1-2` prints only in the HTML logs but not the Erlang
shell. If you want to do both (with free time stamps included), use
the function `ct:pal/1-2`. It works like `io:format/1-2`, but prints
to both the shell and logs.



Test Groups
~~~~~~~~~~~

Right now, our test structure within a suite might look at best like
this:

What if we have many test cases with similar needs in term of some
init functions, but some different parts in them? Well, the easy way
to do it is to copy/paste and modify, but this will be a real pain to
maintain.

Moreover, what if what we want to do with many tests is to run them in
parallel or in random order instead of one after the other? Then
there's no easy way to do that based on what we've seen so far. This
was pretty much the same kind of problem that could limit our use of
EUnit, too.

To solve these issues, we've got something called test groups. Common
Test test groups allow us to regroup some tests hierarchically. Even
more, they can regroup some groups within other groups:

To make this work, we need to be able to declare the groups. The way
to do it is to add a group function to declare all of them:


::

    
    groups() -> ListOfGroups.


Well, there's a `groups()` function. Here's what ListOfGroups should
be:


::

    
    [{GroupName, GroupProperties, GroupMembers}]


And more in detail, here's what this could look like:


::

    
    [{test_case_street_gang,
      [],
      [simple_case, more_complex_case]}].


That's a tiny test case street gang. Here's a more complex one:


::

    
    [{test_case_street_gang,
      [shuffle, sequence],
      [simple_case, more_complex_case,
       emotionally_complex_case,
       {group, name_of_another_test_group}]}].


That one specifies two properties, `shuffle` and `sequence`. We'll see
what they mean soon. The example also shows a group including another
group. This assumes that the group function might be a bit like this:


::

    
    groups() ->
        [{test_case_street_gang,
          [shuffle, sequence],
          [simple_case, more_complex_case, emotionally_complex_case,
           {group, name_of_another_test_group}]},
         {name_of_another_test_group,
          [],
          [case1, case2, case3]}].


What you can do is also define the group inline within another group:


::

    
    [{test_case_street_gang,
      [shuffle, sequence],
      [simple_case, more_complex_case,
       emotionally_complex_case,
       {name_of_another_test_group,
        [],
        [case1, case2, case3]}
      ]}].


That's getting a bit complex, right? Read them carefully, it should be
simpler with time. In any case, nested groups are not a mandatory
thing and you can avoid them if you find them confusing.

But wait, how do you use such a group? Well, by putting them in the
`all/0` function:


::

    
    all() -> [some_case, {group, test_case_street_gang}, other_case].


And that way, Common Test will be able to know whether it needs to run
a test case or not.

I've quickly skipped over the group properties. We've seen `shuffle`,
`sequence` and an empty list. Here's what they stand for:

:empty list / no option: The test cases in the group are run one after
  the other. If a test fails, the others after it in the list are run.
:shuffle: Runs the test in a random order. The random seed (the
  initialization value) used for the sequence will be printed in the
  HTML logs, of the form `{A,B,C}`. If a particular sequence of tests
  fails and you want to reproduce it, use that seed in the HTML logs and
  change the `shuffle` option to instead be `{shuffle, {A,B,C}}`. That
  way you can reproduce random runs in their precise order if you ever
  need to.
:parallel: The tests are run in different processes. Be careful
  because if you forget to export the `init_per_group` and
  `end_per_group` functions, Common Test will silently ignore this
  option.
:sequence: Doesn't necessarily mean that the tests are run in order,
  but rather that if a test fails in the group's list, then all the
  other subsequent tests are skipped. This option can be combined with
  `shuffle` if you want any random test failing to stop the ones after.
:{repeat, Times}: Repeats the group Times times. You could thus run
  the whole test case sequence in parallel 9 times by using the group
  properties `[parallel, {repeat, 9}]`. Times can also have the value
  `forever`, although 'forever' is a bit of a lie as it can't defeat
  concepts such as hardware failure or heat death of the Universe
  (ahem).
:{repeat_until_any_fail, N}: Runs all the tests until one of them
  fails or they have been run N times. N can also be `forever`.
:{repeat_until_all_fail, N}: Same as above, but the tests may run
  until all cases fail.
:{repeat_until_any_succeed, N}: Same as before, except the tests may
  run until at least one case succeeds.
:{repeat_until_all_succeed, N}: I think you can guess this one by
  yourself now, but just in case, it's the same as before except that
  the test cases may run until they all succeed.


Well, that's something. Honestly, that's quite a bit of content for
test groups and I feel an example would be appropriate here.



The Meeting Room
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To first use test groups, we'll create a meeting room booking module.


::

    
    -module(meeting).
    -export([rent_projector/1, use_chairs/1, book_room/1,
             get_all_bookings/0, start/0, stop/0]).
    -record(bookings, {projector, room, chairs}).
    
    start() ->
        Pid = spawn(fun() -> loop(#bookings{}) end),
        register(?MODULE, Pid).
    
    stop() ->
        ?MODULE ! stop.
    
    rent_projector(Group) ->
        ?MODULE ! {projector, Group}.
    
    book_room(Group) ->
        ?MODULE ! {room, Group}.
    
    use_chairs(Group) ->
        ?MODULE ! {chairs, Group}.


These basic functions will call a central registry process. They'll do
things like allowing us to book the room, rent a projector, and put
dibs on chairs. For the sake of the exercise, we're in a large
organization with one hell of a corporate structure. Because of this,
there are three different people responsible for the projector, the
room and the chairs, but one central registry. As such, you can't book
all items at once, but must do it by sending three different messages.

To know who booked what, we can send a message to the registry in
order to get all the values:


::

    
    get_all_bookings() ->
        Ref = make_ref(),
        ?MODULE ! {self(), Ref, get_bookings},
        receive
            {Ref, Reply} ->
                Reply
        end.


The registry itself looks like this:


::

    
    loop(B = #bookings{}) ->
        receive
            stop -> ok;
            {From, Ref, get_bookings} ->
                From ! {Ref, [{room, B#bookings.room},
                              {chairs, B#bookings.chairs},
                              {projector, B#bookings.projector}]},
                loop(B);
            {room, Group} ->
                loop(B#bookings{room=Group});
            {chairs, Group} ->
                loop(B#bookings{chairs=Group});
            {projector, Group} ->
                loop(B#bookings{projector=Group})
        end.


And that's it. To book everything for a successful meeting, we'd need
to successively call:


::

    
    1> c(meeting).
    {ok,meeting}
    2> meeting:start().
    true
    3> meeting:book_room(erlang_group).
    {room,erlang_group}
    4> meeting:rent_projector(erlang_group).
    {projector,erlang_group}
    5> meeting:use_chairs(erlang_group).
    {chairs,erlang_group}
    6> meeting:get_all_bookings().
    [{room,erlang_group},
     {chairs,erlang_group},
     {projector,erlang_group}]


Great. This does seem wrong, though. You've possibly got this
lingering feeling that things could go wrong. In many cases, if we
make the three calls fast enough, we should obtain everything we want
from the room without a problem. If two people do it at once and there
are short pauses between the calls, it seems possible that two (or
more) groups might try to rent the same equipment at once.

Oh no! Suddenly, the programmers might end up having the projector,
while the board of directors has the room, and the human resources
department managed to rent all chairs at once. All resources are tied
up, but nobody can do anything useful!

We won't worry about fixing that problem. Instead we'll work on trying
to demonstrate that it's present with a Common Test suite.

The suite, named meeting_SUITE.erl, will be based on the simple idea
of trying to provoke a race condition that will mess up with the
registration. We'll thus have three test cases, each representing a
group. Carla will represent women, Mark will represent men, and a dog
will represent a group of animals that somehow decided it wanted to
hold a meeting with human-made tools:


::

    
    -module(meeting_SUITE).
    -include_lib("common_test/include/ct.hrl").
    
    ...
    
    carla(_Config) ->
        meeting:book_room(women),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:rent_projector(women),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:use_chairs(women).
    
    mark(_Config) ->
        meeting:rent_projector(men),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:use_chairs(men),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:book_room(men).
    
    dog(_Config) ->
        meeting:rent_projector(animals),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:use_chairs(animals),
        timer:sleep(10),
        meeting:book_room(animals).


We don't care whether these tests actually test something or not. They
are just there to use the `meeting` module (which we'll see how to put
in place for the tests soon) and try to generate wrong reservations.

To find out if we had a race condition or not between all of these
tests, we'll make use of the `meeting:get_all_bookings()` function in
a fourth and final test:


::

    
    all_same_owner(_Config) ->
        [{_, Owner}, {_, Owner}, {_, Owner}] = meeting:get_all_bookings().


This one does a pattern matching on the owners of all different
objects that can be booked, trying to see whether they are actually
booked by the same owner. This is a desirable thing if we are looking
for efficient meetings.

How do we move from having four test cases in a file to something that
works? We'll need to make clever use of test groups.

First of all, because we need a race condition, we know we'll need to
have a bunch of tests running in parallel. Secondly, given we have a
requirement to see the problem from these race conditions, we'll need
to either run `all_same_owner` many times during the whole debacle, or
only after it to look with despair at the aftermath.

I chose the latter. This would give us this:


::

    
    all() -> [{group, clients}, all_same_owner].
    
    groups() -> [{clients,
                  [parallel, {repeat, 10}],
                  [carla, mark, dog]}].


This creates a `clients` group of tests, with the individual tests
being `carla`, `mark`, and `dog`. They're going to run in parallel, 10
times each.

You see that I include the group in the `all/0` function, and then put
`all_same_owner`. That's because by default, Common Test will run the
tests and groups in `all/0` in the order they were declared.

But wait. We forgot to start and stop the `meeting` process itself. To
do it, we'll need to have a way to keep a process alive for all tests,
regardless of whether they're in the 'clients' group or not. The
solution to this problem is to nest things one level deeper, in
another group:


::

    
    all() -> [{group, session}].
    
    groups() -> [{session,
                  [],
                  [{group, clients}, all_same_owner]},
                 {clients,
                  [parallel, {repeat, 10}],
                  [carla, mark, dog]}].
    
    init_per_group(session, Config) ->
        meeting:start(),
        Config;
    init_per_group(_, Config) ->
        Config.
    
    end_per_group(session, _Config) ->
        meeting:stop();
    end_per_group(_, _Config) ->
        ok.


We use the `init_per_group` and `end_per_group` functions to specify
that the `session` group (which now runs `{group, clients}` and
`all_same_owner`) will work with an active meeting. Don't forget to
export the two setup and teardown functions, otherwise nothing will
run in parallel.

Alright, let's run the tests and see what we get:


::

    
    1> ct_run:run_test([{suite, meeting_SUITE}]).
    ...
    Common Test: Running make in test directories...
    ...
    TEST INFO: 1 test(s), 1 suite(s)
    
    Testing ct.meeting.meeting_SUITE: Starting test (with repeated test cases)
    
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    meeting_SUITE:all_same_owner failed on line 50
    Reason: {badmatch,[{room,men},{chairs,women},{projector,women}]}
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    
    Testing ct.meeting.meeting_SUITE: *** FAILED *** test case 31
    Testing ct.meeting.meeting_SUITE: TEST COMPLETE, 30 ok, 1 failed of 31 test cases
    ...
    ok


Interesting. The problem is a badmatch with three tuples with
different items owned by different people. Moreover, the output tells
us it's the `all_same_owner` test that failed. I think that's a pretty
good sign that `all_same_owner` crashed as planned.

If you go look at the HTML log, you'll be able to see all the runs
with the exact test that failed, and for what reason. Click on the
test name and you'll get the right test run.

Note: one last (and very important) thing to know about before moving
on from test groups is that while the init functions of test cases ran
in the same process as the test case, the init functions of groups run
in distinct processes from the tests. This means that whenever you
initialize actors that get linked to the process that spawned them,
you have to make sure to first unlink them. In the case of ETS tables,
you have to define a heir to make sure it doesn't disappear. And so on
for all other concepts that get attached to a process (sockets, file
descriptors, etc.).



Test Suites
~~~~~~~~~~~

What can we add to our test suites that is better than nesting of
groups and manipulations of how one runs things in terms of hierarchy?
Not much, but we'll add another level anyway with the test suite
itself:

We have two additional functions, `init_per_suite(Config)` and
`end_per_suite(Config)`. These, like all the other init and end
functions, aim to give more control over initialization of data and
processes.

The `init_per_suite/1` and `end_per_suite/1` functions will run only
once, respectively before and after all of the groups or test cases.
They'll be mostly useful when dealing with general state and
dependencies that will be required for all tests. This can include
manually starting applications you depend on, for example.



Test Specifications
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There's a thing you might have found pretty annoying if you looked at
your test directory after running tests. There's a ton of files
scattered around the directory for your logs. CSS files, HTML logs,
directories, test run histories, etc. It would be pretty neat to have
a nice way to store these files in a single directory.

Another thing is that so far we've run tests from a test suite. We've
not really seen a good way to do it with many test suites at once, or
even ways to only run one or two cases, or groups from a suite (or
from many suites).

Of course, if I'm saying this, it's because I've got a solution for
these issues. There are ways to do it both from the command line and
from the Erlang shell, and you can find them in the documentation for
ct_run. However, instead of going into ways to manually specify
everything for each time you run the tests, we'll see something called
*test specifications*.

Test specifications are special files that let you detail everything
about how you want to have the tests run, and they work with the
Erlang shell and the command line. The test specification can be put
in a file with any extension you want (although I personally fancy
`.spec` files). The spec files will contain Erlang tuples, much like a
consult file. Here's a few of the items it can have:

: `{include, IncludeDirectories}`: When Common Test automatically
  compiles suites, this option lets you specify where it should look for
  include files in order to make sure they're there. The
  IncludeDirectories value has to be a string (list) or a list of
  strings (list of lists).
: `{logdir, LoggingDirectory}`: When logging, all logs should be moved
  to the LoggingDirectory , a string. Note that the directory must exist
  before the tests are run, otherwise Common Test will complain.
: `{suites, Directory, Suites}`: Finds the given suites in Directory .
  Suites can be an atom ( `some_SUITE`), a list of atoms, or the atom
  `all` to run all the suites in a directory.
: `{skip_suites, Directory, Suites, Comment}`: This subtracts a list
  of suites from those previously declared and skips them. The Comment
  argument is a string explaining why you decided to skip them. This
  comment will be put in the final HTML logs. The tables will show a
  yellow 'SKIPPED: Reason' where Reason is whatever Comment contained.
: `{groups, Directory, Suite, Groups}`: This is an option to pick only
  a few groups from a given suite. The Groups variable can be a single
  atom (the group name) or `all` for all groups. The value can also be
  more complex, letting you override the group definitions inside
  `groups()` within the test case by picking a value like `{GroupName,
  [parallel]}`, which will override GroupName 's options for `parallel`,
  without needing to recompile tests.
: `{groups, Directory, Suite, Groups, {cases,Cases}}`: Similar to the
  one above, but it lets you specify some test cases to include in the
  tests by substituting Cases by a single case name (an atom), a list of
  names, or the atom `all`.
: `{skip_groups, Directory, Suite, Groups, Comment}`: This command was
  only added in R15B and documented in R15B01. It allows one to skip
  test groups, much like the `skip_suites` for suites. There is no
  explanation as to why it wasn't there before then.
: `{skip_groups, Directory, Suite, Groups, {cases,Cases}, Comment}`:
  Similar to the one above, but with specific test cases to skip on top
  of it. Also only available since R15B.
: `{cases, Directory, Suite, Cases}`: Runs specific test cases from a
  given suite. Cases can be an atom, a list of atoms, or `all`.
: `{skip_cases, Directory, Suite, Cases, Comment}`: This is similar to
  `skip_suites`, except we choose specific test cases to avoid with this
  one.
: `{alias, Alias, Directory}`: Because it gets very annoying to write
  all these directory names (especially if they're full names), Common
  Test lets you substitute them with aliases (atoms). This is pretty
  useful in order to be concise.


Before showing a simple example, you should add a `logs/` directory
above the `demo/` one ( `ct/` in my files). Unsurprisingly, that's
where our Common Test logs will be moved to. Here's what a possible
test specification could look like for all our tests so far, under the
imaginative name of `spec.spec`:


::

    
    {alias, demo, "./demo/"}.
    {alias, meeting, "./meeting/"}.
    {logdir, "./logs/"}.
    
    {suites, meeting, all}.
    {suites, demo, all}.
    {skip_cases, demo, basic_SUITE, test2, "This test fails on purpose"}.


This spec file declares two aliases, `demo` and `meeting`, which point
to the two test directories we have. We put the logs inside
`ct/logs/`, our newest directory. Then we ask to run all suites in the
meeting directory, which, coincidentally is the `meeting_SUITE` suite.
Next on the list are the two suites inside the demo directory.
Moreover, we ask to skip `test2` from the `basic_SUITE` suite, given
it contains a division by zero that we know will fail.

To run the tests, you can either use `$ ct_run -spec spec.spec` (or
`run_test` for versions of Erlang before R15), or you can use the
function `ct:run_test([{spec, "spec.spec"}]).` from the Erlang shell:


::

    
    Common Test: Running make in test directories...
    ...
    TEST INFO: 2 test(s), 3 suite(s)
    
    Testing ct.meeting: Starting test (with repeated test cases)
    
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    meeting_SUITE:all_same_owner failed on line 51
    Reason: {badmatch,[{room,men},{chairs,women},{projector,women}]}
    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    
    Testing ct.meeting: *** FAILED *** test case 31
    Testing ct.meeting: TEST COMPLETE, 30 ok, 1 failed of 31 test cases
    
    Testing ct.demo: Starting test, 3 test cases
    Testing ct.demo: TEST COMPLETE, 2 ok, 0 failed, 1 skipped of 3 test cases
    
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs/index.html... done
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs/all_runs.html... done


If you take the time to look at the logs, you'll see two directories
for the different test runs. One of them will have a failure; that's
the meeting that fails as expected. The other one will have one
success, and one skipped case, of the form `1 (1/0)`. Generally, the
format is `TotalSkipped (IntentionallySkipped/SkippedDueToError)`. In
this case the skip happened from the spec file, so it goes on the
left. If it happened because one of the many init functions failed,
then it'd be on the right.

Common Test is starting to look like a pretty decent testing
framework, but it'd be pretty nice to be able to use our distributed
programming knowledge and apply it.



Large Scale Testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Common Test does support having distributed tests. Before going hog
wild and writing a bunch of code, let's see what's offered. Well,
there isn't *that* much. The gist of it is that Common Test lets you
start tests on many different nodes, but also has ways to dynamically
start these nodes and have them watch each other.

As such, the distributed features of Common Test are really useful
when you have large test suites that should be run in parallel on many
nodes. This is often worth it to save time or because the code will
run in production environments that are on different computers â€”
automated tests that reflect this are desired.

When tests go distributed, Common Test requires the presence of a
central node (the *CT master*) in charge of all the other ones.
Everything's going to be directed from there, from starting nodes,
ordering tests to be run, gathering logs, etc.

The first step to get things going that way is to expand our test
specifications so they become distributed. We're going to add a few
new tuples:

: `{node, NodeAlias, NodeName}`: Much like `{alias, AliasAtom,
  Directory}` for test suites, groups, and cases, except it's used for
  node names. Both NodeAlias and NodeName need to be atoms. This tuple
  is especially useful because NodeName needs to be a long node name,
  and in some cases this can be quite long.
: `{init, NodeAlias, Options}`: This is a more complex one. This is
  the option that lets you start nodes. NodeAlias can be a single node
  alias, or a list of many of them. The Options are those available to
  the `ct_slave` module:


Here are a few of the options available:

: `{username, UserName}` and `{password, Password}`: Using the host
  part of the node given by NodeAlias , Common Test will try to connect
  to the given host over SSH (on port 22) using the user name and
  password and run from there.
: `{startup_functions, [{M,F,A}]}`: This option defines a list of
  functions to be called as soon as the other node has booted.
: `{erl_flags, String}`: This sets standard flags that we'd want to
  pass to the `erl` application when we start it. For example, if we
  wanted to start a node with `erl -env ERL_LIBS ../ -config conf_file`,
  the option would be `{erl_flags, "-env ERL_LIBS ../ -config
  config_file"}`.
: `{monitor_master, true | false}`: If the CT master stops running and
  the option is set to `true`, then the slave node will also be taken
  down. I do recommend using this option if you're spawning the remote
  nodes; otherwise they'll keep running in the background if the master
  dies. Moreover, if you run tests again, Common Test will be able to
  connect to these nodes, and there will be some state attached to them.
: `{boot_timeout, Seconds}`, `{init_timeout, Seconds}`,
  `{startup_timeout, Seconds}`: These three options let you wait for
  different parts of the starting of a remote node. The boot timeout is
  about how long it takes before the node becomes pingable, with a
  default value of 3 seconds. The init timeout is an internal timer
  where the new remote node calls back the CT master to tell it it's up.
  By default, it lasts one second. Finally, the startup timeout tells
  Common Test how long to wait for the functions we defined earlier as
  part of the `startup_functions` tuple.
: `{kill_if_fail, true | false}`: This option will react to one of the
  three timeouts above. If any of them are triggered, Common Test will
  abort the connection, skip tests, etc. but not necessarily kill the
  node, unless the option is set to `true`. Fortunately, that's the
  default value.


Note: all these options are provided by the `ct_slave` module. It is
possible to define your own module to start slave nodes, as long as it
respects the right interface.

That makes for quite a lot of options for remote nodes, but that's
partially what gives Common Test its distributed power; you're able to
boot nodes with pretty much as much control as what you'd get doing it
by hand in the shell. Still, there are more options for distributed
tests, although they're not for booting nodes:


::

    
    {include, Nodes, IncludeDirs}
    {logdir, Nodes, LogDir}
    {suites, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suites}
    {groups, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suite, Groups}
    {groups, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suite, GroupSpec, {cases,Cases}}
    {cases, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suite, Cases}
    {skip_suites, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suites, Comment}
    {skip_cases, Nodes, DirectoryOrAlias, Suite, Cases, Comment}


These are pretty much the same as what we've already seen, except that
they can optionally take a node argument to add more detail. That way
you can decide to run some suites on a given node, others on different
nodes, etc. This could be useful when doing system testing with
different nodes running different environments or parts of the system
(such as databases, external applications, etc.)

As a simple way to see how this works, let's turn the previous
`spec.spec` file into a distributed one. Copy it as `dist.spec` and
then change it until it looks like this:


::

    
    {node, a, 'a@ferdmbp.local'}.
    {node, b, 'b@ferdmbp.local'}.
    
    {init, [a,b], [{node_start, [{monitor_master, true}]}]}.
    
    {alias, demo, "./demo/"}.
    {alias, meeting, "./meeting/"}.
    
    {logdir, [all_nodes,master], "./logs/"}.
    
    {suites, [b], meeting, all}.
    {suites, [a], demo, all}.
    {skip_cases, [a], demo, basic_SUITE, test2, "This test fails on purpose"}.


This changes it a bit. We define two slave nodes, `a` and `b`, that
need to be started for the tests. They do nothing special but make
sure to die if the master dies. The aliases for directories remain the
same as they were.

The `logdir` values are interesting. We declared no node alias as
`all_nodes` or `master`, but yet, here they are. The `all_nodes` alias
stands for all non-master nodes for Common Test, while `master` stands
for the master node itself. To truly include all nodes,
`[all_nodes,master]` is required. No clear explanation as to why these
names were picked.

The reason why I put all values there is that Common Test will
generate logs (and directories) for each of the slave nodes, and it
will also generate a master set of logs, referring to the slave ones.
I don't want any of these in directories other than `logs/`. Note that
the logs for the slave nodes will be stored on each of the slave nodes
individually. In that case, unless all nodes share the same
filesystem, the HTML links in the master's logs won't work and you'll
have to access each of the nodes to get their respective logs.

Last of all are the `suites` and `skip_cases` entries. They're pretty
much the same as the previous ones, but adapted for each node. This
way, you can skip some entries only on given nodes (which you know
might be missing libraries or dependencies), or maybe more intensive
ones where the hardware isn't up to the task.

To run distributed tests of the sort, we must start a distributed node
with `-name` and use `ct_master` to run the suites:


::

    
    $ erl -name ct
    Erlang R15B (erts-5.9) [source] [64-bit] [smp:4:4] [async-threads:0] [hipe] [kernel-poll:false]
    
    Eshell V5.9  (abort with ^G)
    (ct@ferdmbp.local)1> ct_master:run("dist.spec").
    === Master Logdir ===
    /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs
    === Master Logger process started ===
    <0.46.0>
    Node 'a@ferdmbp.local' started successfully with callback ct_slave
    Node 'b@ferdmbp.local' started successfully with callback ct_slave
    === Cookie ===
    'PMIYERCHJZNZGSRJPVRK'
    === Starting Tests ===
    Tests starting on: ['b@ferdmbp.local','a@ferdmbp.local']
    === Test Info ===
    Starting test(s) on 'b@ferdmbp.local'...
    === Test Info ===
    Starting test(s) on 'a@ferdmbp.local'...
    === Test Info ===
    Test(s) on node 'a@ferdmbp.local' finished.
    === Test Info ===
    Test(s) on node 'b@ferdmbp.local' finished.
    === TEST RESULTS ===
    a@ferdmbp.local_________________________finished_ok
    b@ferdmbp.local_________________________finished_ok
    
    === Info ===
    Updating log files
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs/index.html... done
    Updating /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs/all_runs.html... done
    Logs in /Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs refreshed!
    === Info ===
    Refreshing logs in "/Users/ferd/code/self/learn-you-some-erlang/ct/logs"... ok
    [{"dist.spec",ok}]


There is no way to run such tests using `ct_run`. Note that CT will
show all results as ok whether or not the tests actually succeeded.
That is because `ct_master` only shows if it could contact all the
nodes. The results themselves are actually stored on each individual
node.

You'll also note that CT shows that it started nodes, and with what
cookies it did so. If you try running tests again without first
terminating the master, the following warnings are shown instead:


::

    
    WARNING: Node 'a@ferdmbp.local' is alive but has node_start option
    WARNING: Node 'b@ferdmbp.local' is alive but has node_start option


That's alright. It only means that Common Test is able to connect to
remote nodes, but it found no use in calling our `init` tuple from the
test specification, given the nodes are already alive. There is no
need for Common Test to actually start any remote nodes it will run
tests on, but I usually find it useful to do so.

That's really the gist of distributed spec files. Of course you can
get into more complex cases, where you set up more complex clusters
and write amazing distributed tests, but as the tests become more
complex, the less confidence you can have in their ability to
successfully demonstrate properties of your software, simply because
tests themselves might contain more and more errors as they become
convoluted.



Integrating EUnit within Common Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because sometimes EUnit is the best tool for the job, and sometimes
Common Test is, it might be desirable for you to include one into the
other.

While it's difficult to include Common Test suites within EUnit ones,
the opposite is quite easy to do. The trick is that when you call
`eunit:test(SomeModule)`, the function can return either `ok` when
things work, or `error` in case of any failure.

This means that to integrate EUnit tests to a Common Test suite, all
you need to do is have a function a bit like this:


::

    
    run_eunit(_Config) ->
        ok = eunit:test(TestsToRun).


And all your EUnit tests that can be found by the TestsToRun
description will be run. If there's a failure, it'll appear in your
Common Test logs and you'll be able to read the output to see what
went wrong. It's that simple.



Is There More?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You bet there's more. Common Test is a very complex beast. There are
ways to add configuration files for some variables, add hooks that run
at many points during the test executions, use callbacks on events
during the suites, modules to test over `SSH`, `Telnet`, `SNMP`, and
`FTP`.

This chapter only scratched the surface, but it is enough to get you
started if you want to explore in more depth. A more complete document
about Common Test is the user's guide coming with Erlang/OTP. It is
hard to read on its own, but understanding the material covered in
this very chapter will help you figure out the documentation, without
a doubt.

.. _ETS chapter: ets.html


